DADA: HW 2: x64 assembly
========================

[Go up to the main DADA homeworks page](index.html) ([md](index.md))

### Introduction

This assignment will refresh your knowledge of x86 assembly language
(which you will have to analyze in all the virus detection assignments
later in this semester), expose you to the "tricky jump" style of code
often used by virus writers, and familiarize you with a couple of key
tools used in the analysis of programs in their binary form.

The reference platform for this project is the 64-bit Linux VirtualBox
image.  Although most viruses are for the Windows platform, for
reasons described in class, we are using the Linux platform to make
this assignment easier to perform.  Similar binary analysis tools
exist on Windows (and Mac OS X) platforms.

You are welcome to use Mac OS X -- or even Windows -- to write and
compile your code.  However, it needs to work under Linux.  Your C/C++
code may have to call `_foo()` instead of `foo()` - try each one to
see which one works.  When you submit it, it should __not__ have the
underscore.  The binary analysis will have to be done under the
reference platform of 64-bit Linux.


### Part 1: x86 code

- Read the [tricky jump document](../docs/tricky-jump.html)
  ([md](../docs/tricky-jump.md))
- Use the C++ code shown below for the main.cpp
- Create an x86 assembly language file called density.s, in your
  favorite text editor that computes the volume and density of a
  rectangular solid object
    - To avoid the messiness of doing input and output in x86
      assembly, the routine will be called from a C++ language
      `main()` function, and the numerical values of the length,
      width, height, and weight of the object are to be passed in as
      parameters to the subroutine(s).
	- The program may assume that the dimensions are in inches and the
      weight in pounds, and the density is to be computed in units of
      pounds per cubic inch.
	- Integer computations are expected, not floating point.
	- The assembly routines should compute the volume (as that is the
      method that was called), then execute a "tricky jump" to a
      function that computes the density
	- Return directly from this density function to `main()`, passing
      back the density (not volume!) as the return value.
	- Thus, we are storing the density value into the volume variable.
- Create an appropriate Makefile to compile your project; see the
  links above for details.  Your executable needs to be named
  `volume`!
- Answer the questions below about the executable that you created
  (`volume`), and put those answers into a file named analysis.pdf.

Your Makefile MUST generate an executable called `volume`!  Anything
else will not be graded!

Use the following code for your main.cpp.  Note that, for the
parameters given, the volume is 960 and the density is 5.

```
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

extern "C" int volume (int, int, int, int);

int  main () {
  int len = 12, width = 8, height = 10, weight = 4800;
  int vol = volume(len, width, height, weight);
  cout << "volume: " << vol << endl;
  return 0;
}
```

### Part 2: analysis

The questions to answer are below.  There are a number of command-line
tools that can be used to generate these answers, which are listed by
each question.  You can type `man foo` at the Linux command prompt to
see the full manual page about the 'foo' program.  Some of the
commands below require to to use specific flags described in the
manual page for each command.

See "Notes on interpreting the objdump file", below, for help
interpreting the output.

- What are the addresses or registers of the four local variables in
  `main()`?
- Look at the list of symbols in the executable via the `nm` command;
  there should be 50 or so.  Which of these do you recognize?  Google
  for some others to determine what their purpose is.
- View a disassembly of the executable via `objdump -sRrd volume`.
  **WARNING:** this output is *not* in the assembly format that was
  studied in CS 2150; see
  [here](http://aaronbloomfield.github.io/pdr/slides/08-assembly-64bit.html#/9/8)
  for the details of the differences.
    - What are the addresses or registers of the four parameters
      passed into `volume()`?
    - What shared libraries are used by your program?  Briefly, what
      are each of these libraries?  Look at the 'ldd' command.
    - `__libc_start_main` is passed several (constant) addresses. What
      do these appear to represent? (It is sufficient to identify what
      things they are addresses of.)
    - What is the shortest x86 assembly command, in terms of bytes?
      If there are many, you need just list one
    - What is the longest command?  Again, if there are many, you need
      just list one.
    - How could we determine if a tricky jump appears in the assembly code?
- Look at the information output by `readelf -d`.
    - What information can we gleam about this executable from the ELF
      header?
    - Based on the "entry point address", and the output from the 'nm'
      command, above, what is the entry point of the program?

Answer these questions in a PDF file called analysis.pdf.  Copy the
questions above (you can from the web page copy of this assignment)
and type your answers below each question. Below each answer, copy and
paste the specific portions of the tools output that were used to
answer the question.

### Part 3: detecting tricky jumps

Write a separate C or C++ program that takes in, as the input, an
objdump from the above executable.  It should read it in as standard
input - we are not dealing with file input and output.  First, you may
want to save the output of objdump to a file:

```
objdump -sRrd volume > input.txt
```

Your program must read in that file via standard input:

```
./tricky < input.txt
```

Your program is to detect if there is a tricky jump in that code.  You
can assume a few things to make this easier:

- A tricky jump will appear as a push right before a ret, as described
  herein (and implemented above)
- You can assume the EXACT format of the input file is what `objdump -sRrd`
  outputs; this means the commands you are looking for are `pushq`
  and `retq`

If a tricky jump is found, then you should output "tricky jump found!"
for __each__ time it's found.  If there are __no__ tricky jumps, then
output "tricky jump not found".

We are not looking for error-proof or long-winded code!  The reference
solution was about 20 lines.

Your Makefile MUST generate an executable called `tricky`!  Anything
else will not be graded!

### Part 4: Makefile

You will need to create a Makefile that will compile the programs.
There are three __required__ aspects to the Makefile.

- The volume/density problem from part 1 must compile to an executable
  named `volume`
- The tricky jump detection problem from part 3 must compile to an
  executable named `tricky`

You may want to start with the Makefile for the vecsum program
provided in CS 2150 (see
[here](http://aaronbloomfield.github.io/pdr/labs/lab08-64bit/index.html)).
That example uses clang++ as the compiler, but you can use either
clang++ or g++.

It's fine if your source code files are named something slightly
different, as long as your Makefile can compile both of them.  We just
have to be able to reasonably tell which source code file name is
which.  But the executables need to be named exactly the same as
specified herein.

### Notes on interpreting the objdump file

This section (and some of the questions for analysis.pdf) was taken
with permission from Charles Reiss (original was
[here](https://www.cs.virginia.edu/~cr4bd/4630/S2017/assignments/re.html)).

**General format**

The objdump output we provide contains several parts corresponding to
several parts of the executable, which are described in more detail
below:

- Information about the type of executable file. This indicates what
  architecture it is for, that it is in Linux's ELF format, and the
  address at which execution of the program starts.

- The actual contents of each "section" of the executable that will be
  loaded into memory. The sections have names like ".text" and
  ".dynstr" depending on their purpose. These will look something
  like:
```
Contents of section .text:
 4004d0 4883ec28 ba050000 00be0c00 00004889  H..(..........H.
 4004e0 e764488b 04252800 00004889 44241831  .dH..%(...H.D$.1
 4004f0 c0e83a01 0000488d 74240c48 89e031d2  ..:...H.t$.H..1.
```

    The leftmost column indicates the address (in hexadecimal) where
    this data will be loaded in memory. The next four columns are the
    hexadecimal values actually placed in memory. These values are
    written in the order the bytes appear in memory, so the value
    "0x12345678" in little Endian will appear as "78563412". The final
    columns are the same values represented as characters, except a
    period (`.`) is used to represent bytes which do not correspond to
    a printable ASCII character.

- Disassembled versions of sections that contain executable code.
  These will look something like:
```
    0000000000400460 <_init>:
      400460:       48 83 ec 08             sub    $0x8,%rsp
      400464:       48 8b 05 8d 0b 20 00    mov    0x200b8d(%rip),%rax        # 600ff8 <_DYNAMIC+0x1d0>
      40046b:       48 85 c0                test   %rax,%rax
      40046e:       74 05                   je     400475 <_init+0x15>
      400470:       e8 3b 00 00 00          callq  4004b0 <__gmon_start__@plt>
      400475:       48 83 c4 08             add    $0x8,%rsp
      400479:       c3                      retq
```

    This indicates that there is a label called `_init` which has the
    address "0x400460" when the executable is loaded. Each following
    line is an instruction. The value before the colon indicates the
    memory address in hexadecimal of the first byte of the
    instruction. The hexadecimal values after the colon are the bytes
    of the instruction in hexadecimal. Following this is the
    disassembled instruction itself.

    Within the disassembled instructions, `objdump` attempts to
    provide information about addresses in addition to showing the
    addresses encoded in the instruction. In cases where the label is
    exactly equal to the address, like for the label
    `__gmon_start__@plt` in the example above, the format is `address
    <LABEL>` with the address in hexadecimal. In cases where the
    address does not correspond to a label, the format is `address
    <LABEL+offset>`. For example `400475 <_init+0x15>` indicates the
    address "0x400475", which is 0x15 bytes after the label `_init`.

    On 64-bit x86, some instructions specify an address relative to
    `%rip`. `%rip` represents the "instruction pointer", which in 2150
    and 3330 we have called the "program counter". It is the address
    of the current instruction, so `0x200b8d(%rip)` means memory
    0x200b8d bytes after the address of the current
    instruction. `objdump`'s disassembly includes a comment indicating
    what address is computed. In the case of the example above, the
    address is 0x600ff8, which is 0x1d0 bytes after the label
    `_DYNAMIC`.

Note that this is not all the information in the executable and not
all the information that objdump is capable of providing.

**On dynamic linking**

This executable is dynamically linked, so it doesn't include code for
functions in the C standard library like `printf()`. These are loaded
at runtime by the dynamic linker which is contained in
`/lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2`. The way Linux implements dynamic
linking involves having this program handle loading all dynamically
linked executables as an interpreter.

As part of Linux's implementation of dynamic linking, there is a
Procedure Linkage Table (PLT). This contains "stubs" for each function
the executable expects to find in a dynamically linked library, like
the C standard library. One of the "stubs" looks like:

```
00000000004004c0 <__printf_chk@plt>:
  4004c0:       ff 25 6a 0b 20 00       jmpq   *0x200b6a(%rip)        # 601030 <_GLOBAL_OFFSET_TABLE_+0x30>
  4004c6:       68 03 00 00 00          pushq  $0x3
  4004cb:       e9 b0 ff ff ff          jmpq   400480 <_init+0x20>
```

This stub is called `__print_chk@plt` and is loaded into the program's
memory at address 0x4004c0. The first instruction in this function
reads the *address of a function* from memory at 0x601030, then jumps
to that function. As indicated by the comment added by `objdump` this
address is part of the "global offset table". This is an array of
pointers used to find functions like `printf()` which are loaded every
time the executable runs. Using this table allows the same program to
work with different implementations of `printf()`, where printf may
end up at different locations in memory. For example, in this case the
global offset table will eventually contain the address at which
`__printf_chk`, part of the Linux C library's implementation of
`printf()` is loaded into memory.

By default, the values in this global offset table are initialized to
point to the instruction following the jump, for example 0x601030
contains 0x4004c6. This means that the first time the "stub" is
called, it will "fall through" to the code after the global offset
table jump. This code pushes an indicator of what function was called
on the stack, then jumps to part of the dynamic linker. (This code is
not included in the executable file, and therefore not present in the
objdump output.) The dynamic linker will then locate the actual
routine (the implementation of `__printf_chk` in the standard library,
in this case) and update the global offset table to contain its
address.

**On `_start`**

Execution of the program does not actually start in main but starts in
a function called `_start` that is provided by the compiler -- this is
the start address specified in the program header. This function calls
a special function in the C standard library called
`__libc_start_main`. It is this function that actually calls `main()`
and takes care of exiting when `main()` returns.

**On `%fs`**

x86 has a feature called "segmentation". As part of this feature, the
processor has several "segment registers" which specify a region of
memory -- essentially the segment register acts as a
pointer. `%fs:0x28` specifies to use segment register `%fs` and access
a value 0x28 bytes from the beginning of the memory region it
identifies.

On Linux, the `%fs` segment register is used for "thread-local
storage" -- to point to a block of data particular to a thread, even
in a multithreaded process.

On Windows, the `%gs` segment register is used for something similar.

The use of a segment register for this purpose instead of a normal
register is just to make sure as many registers are available to the
program as possible.

Segmentation was originally intended to provide functionality similar
to virtual memory. These days, it is rarely used for this purpose, and
its primary use is to support thread-local storage, as occurs briefly
in the assembly in this assignment. It is, still, however, universally
present on x86 and is entangled with x86's implementation of kernel
mode and exceptions.

### Items to Submit 

These files need to be submitted to the HW 2 assignment via the course
tools submission.

- File density.s with your assembly language solution for
  volume/density (from part 1)
- File main.cpp with your C++ code for the `main()` function for the
  volume/density code (from part 1)
- A PDF document called analysis.pdf with the analysis questions given
  above (in part 2) and their answers.
- File tricky.cpp with your C++ code for the `main()` function for the
  tricky jump detection code from part 3
- A Makefile that compiles the programs, as explained above in part 4
  -- make sure the executables are named `volume` and `tricky`!
